President of the United States , successfully led his country through its greatest internal crisis, the
American Civil War , only to be
assassinated  as the war was coming to an end. 1  Before becoming the first
Republican  elected to the Presidency, Lincoln was a
lawyer , an
Illinois
state legislator , a member of the
United States House of Representatives , and an unsuccessful candidate for election to the
Senate .
As an outspoken opponent of the expansion of
slavery in the United States , 2  3  Lincoln won the
Republican Party  nomination in 1860 and was
elected president  later that year. During his time in office, he contributed to the effort to preserve the
United States  by leading the defeat of the
secessionist
Confederate States of America  in the American Civil War. He introduced measures that resulted in the abolition of
slavery , issuing his
Emancipation Proclamation  in 1863 and promoting the passage of the
Thirteenth Amendment  to the Constitution, which passed Congress before Lincoln's death and was ratified by the states later in 1865.
Lincoln closely supervised the victorious war effort, especially the selection of top
generals , including
Ulysses S. Grant . Historians have concluded that he handled the factions of the Republican Party well, bringing leaders of each faction into his cabinet and forcing them to cooperate. Lincoln successfully defused a
war scare  with the
United Kingdom  in 1861. Under his leadership, the
Union  took control of the
border slave states  at the start of the war. Additionally, he managed his own reelection in the
1864 presidential election .
Opponents of the war (also known as "
Copperheads ") criticized Lincoln for refusing to compromise on the slavery issue. Conversely, the
Radical Republicans , an abolitionist faction of the Republican Party, criticized him for moving too slowly in abolishing slavery. Even with these road blocks, Lincoln successfully rallied public opinion through his rhetoric and speeches; his
Gettysburg Address  is but one example of this. At the close of the war, Lincoln held a moderate view of
Reconstruction , seeking to speedily reunite the nation through a policy of generous reconciliation.
His assassination in 1865  was the first presidential assassination in U.S. history and made him a
martyr  for the ideal of national unity.
Early life
Main article:
Abraham Lincoln's early life and career
===Childhood and education===
Abraham Lincoln was born on February 12, 1809, to
Thomas Lincoln  and
Nancy Hanks , two uneducated farmers, in a one-room
log cabin  on the 348-acre (1.4&nbsp;km2) Sinking Spring Farm, in southeast
Hardin County, Kentucky  (now part of
LaRue County ), making him the first president born outside the original
Thirteen Colonies . Lincoln's ancestor
Samuel Lincoln  had arrived in
Hingham, Massachusetts  in the 17th century, but his descendants had gradually moved west, from Pennsylvania to Virginia and then westward to the frontier. 4
Symbolic log cabin at the
Abraham Lincoln Birthplace National Historic Site
For some time, Thomas Lincoln, Abraham's father, was a respected and relatively affluent citizen of the Kentucky backcountry. He had purchased the Sinking Spring Farm in December 1808 for $200 cash and assumption of a debt. The family belonged to a
Hardshell Baptist  church, although Abraham himself never joined their church, or any other church for that matter.
In 1816, the Lincoln family was forced to make a new start in
Perry County  (now in
Spencer County ), Indiana. He later noted that this move was "partly on account of slavery," and partly because of difficulties with land deeds in Kentucky: Unlike land in the
Northwest Territory , Kentucky never had a proper U.S. survey, and farmers often had difficulties proving title to their property.
When Lincoln was nine, his mother, then 34 years old, died of
milk sickness . Soon afterwards, his father remarried to
Sarah Bush Johnston . Lincoln was affectionate toward his stepmother, whom he would call "Mother" for the rest of his life, but he was distant from his father. 5
In 1830, after more economic and land-title difficulties in Indiana, the family settled on public land 6  in
Macon County, Illinois . The following winter was desolate and especially brutal, and the family considered moving back to Indiana. The following year, when his father relocated the family to a
new homestead  in
Coles County, Illinois , 22-year-old Lincoln struck out on his own, canoeing down the
Sangamon River  to the village of
New Salem  in
Sangamon County . 7  Later that year, hired by New Salem businessman
Denton Offutt  and accompanied by friends, he took goods from New Salem to
New Orleans  via flatboat on the Sangamon,
Illinois  and
Mississippi  rivers.
Lincoln's formal education consisted of about 18 months of schooling, but he was largely self-educated and an avid reader. He was also a talented local wrestler and skilled with an axe. 8  Lincoln avoided hunting and fishing because he did not like killing animals, even for food. 9  At 6&nbsp;foot 4&nbsp;inches (1.93&nbsp;m), he was unusually tall, as well as strong.
Early political career and military service
Sketch of a younger Abraham Lincoln
Lincoln began his political career in 1832, at age 23, with an unsuccessful campaign for the
Illinois General Assembly , as a member of the
Whig Party . The centerpiece of his platform was the undertaking of navigational improvements on the
Sangamon River . He believed that this would attract steamboat traffic, which would allow the sparsely populated, poorer areas along the river to flourish.
He was elected captain of an Illinois
militia  company drawn from New Salem during the
Black Hawk War , and later wrote that he had not had "any such success in life which gave him so much satisfaction." 10  11
For several months, Lincoln ran a small store in New Salem. In 1834, he won election to the state legislature, and, after coming across the
Commentaries on the Laws of England  , began to teach himself law.
Admitted to the bar  in 1837, he moved to
Springfield, Illinois , that same year and began to practice law with
John T. Stuart . With a reputation as a formidable adversary during cross-examinations and in his closing arguments, Lincoln became an able and successful lawyer. 12
He served four successive terms in the
Illinois House of Representatives  as a representative from Sangamon County, and became a leader of the Illinois Whig party. In 1837, he made his first protest against slavery in the Illinois House, stating that the institution was "founded on both injustice and bad policy." 13  It was also in this same year that Lincoln met
Joshua Fry Speed , who would become a close friend.
Lincoln wrote a series of anonymous letters, published in 1842 in the
Sangamon Journal  , mocking State Auditor and prominent Democrat
James Shields . Two years later, Lincoln entered law practice with
William Herndon , a fellow Whig. In 1854, both men joined the fledgling
Republican Party . Following Lincoln's death, Herndon began collecting stories about Lincoln and published them in  Herndon's Lincoln .
The first photograph ever taken of
Mary Lincoln , a
daguerreotype  by N.H. Shepherd, about 1846.
Marriage and family
On November 4, 1842 Lincoln married
Mary Todd , daughter of a prominent slave-owning family from Kentucky. The couple had four sons.
Robert Todd Lincoln  was born in Springfield, Illinois on August 1, 1843. Their only child to survive into adulthood, young Robert attended
Phillips Exeter Academy  and
Harvard College .
The other Lincoln children were born in Springfield, Illinois, and died either during childhood or their teen years.
Edward Baker Lincoln  was born on March 10, 1846, and died on February 1, 1850, also in Springfield.
William "Willie" Wallace Lincoln  was born on December 21, 1850, and died on February 20, 1862 in
Washington, D.C. , during President Lincoln's first term.
Thomas "Tad" Lincoln  was born on April 4, 1853, and died on July 16, 1871 in
Chicago .
The first photograph ever taken of Abraham Lincoln, a daguerreotype by N.H. Shepherd, about 1846.
Legislative activity
A Whig and an admirer of party leader
Henry Clay , Lincoln was
elected  to a term in the
U.S. House of Representatives  in 1846. As a freshman House member, he was not a particularly powerful or influential figure. However, he spoke out against the
Mexican-American War , which he attributed to
President Polk's  desire for "military glory" and challenged the President's claims regarding the Texas boundary and offered
Spot Resolutions , demanding to know on what "spot" on US soil that blood was first spilt. 14
Lincoln later damaged his political reputation with a speech in which he declared, "God of Heaven has forgotten to defend the weak and innocent, and permitted the strong band of murderers and demons from hell to kill men, women, and children, and lay waste and pillage the land of the just." Two weeks later, President Polk sent a peace treaty to Congress. While no one in Washington paid any attention to Lincoln, the Democrats orchestrated angry outbursts from across his district, where the war was popular and many had volunteered.
Warned by his law partner,
William Herndon , that the damage was mounting and irreparable, Lincoln decided not to run for reelection. His statements were not easily forgotten, and would haunt him during the
Civil War . These statements were also held against him when he applied for a position in the new Taylor administration. Instead, Taylor's people offered Lincoln various positions in the remote
Oregon Territory , primarily the
governorship . Acceptance of this offer would have ended his career in the rapidly growing state of Illinois, so Lincoln declined the position. Returning to Springfield, Lincoln gave up politics for several years and turned his energies to his law practice.
Prairie lawyer
By the mid-1850s, Lincoln's caseload focused largely on the competing transportation interests of
river barges  and
railroads . In one prominent 1851 case, he represented the
Alton &amp; Sangamon Railroad  in a dispute with a shareholder, James A. Barret. Barret had refused to pay the balance on his pledge to the railroad on the grounds that it had changed its originally planned route. Lincoln argued that as a matter of law a corporation is not bound by its original charter when that charter can be amended in the public interest, that the newer route proposed by Alton &amp; Sangamon was superior and less expensive, and that accordingly, the corporation had a right to sue Barret for his delinquent payment. He won this case, and the decision by the
Illinois Supreme Court  was eventually cited by several other courts throughout the United States. 15
The civil case which won Lincoln fame as a lawyer was the landmark
Hurd v. Rock Island Bridge Company . America's expansion west, which Lincoln strongly supported, was seen as an economic threat to the river trade, which ran north-to-south, primarily on the
Mississippi river . In 1856 a steamboat collided with a bridge, built by the
Rock Island Railroad , between
Rock Island, Illinois , and
Davenport, Iowa , the first railroad bridge to span the Mississippi. The steamboat owner sued for damages, claiming the bridge was a hazard to navigation. Lincoln argued in court for the railroad and won, removing a costly impediment to western expansion by establishing the right of land routes to bridge waterways.
In the 1920s, historical markers were placed at the county lines along the route Lincoln traveled in the eighth judicial district. This example is on the border of
Piatt  and
DeWitt counties .
Possibly the most notable criminal trial of Lincoln's career as a lawyer came in 1858, when he defended
William "Duff" Armstrong , who had been charged with murder. The case became famous for Lincoln's use of
judicial notice  — a rare tactic at that time — to show that an eyewitness had lied on the stand. After the witness testified to having seen the crime by moonlight, Lincoln produced a
Farmers' Almanac   to show that the
moon  on that date was at such a low angle that it could not have provided enough illumination to see anything clearly. Based almost entirely on this evidence, Armstrong was acquitted. 16
Lincoln was involved in more than 5,100 cases in Illinois alone during his 23-year legal career. Though many of these cases involved little more than filing a writ, others were more substantial and quite involved. Lincoln and his partners appeared before the Illinois State Supreme Court more than 400 times.
Republican politics 1854&ndash;1860
Lincoln returned to politics in response to the
Kansas-Nebraska Act  (1854), which expressly repealed the limits on slavery's extent as determined by the
Missouri Compromise  (1820). Illinois Democrat
Stephen A. Douglas , the most powerful man in the Senate, proposed
popular sovereignty  as the solution to the slavery impasse, and incorporated it into the Kansas&ndash;Nebraska Act. Douglas argued that in a democracy the people should have the right to decide whether or not to allow slavery in their territory, rather than have such a decision imposed on them by Congress. 17
In the October 16, 1854, "
Peoria Speech ", 18  Lincoln first stood out among the other
free soil  orators of the day: 19
[The Act has a]  declared  indifference, but as I must think, covert  real  zeal for the spread of slavery, I cannot but hate it. I hate it because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself. I hate it because it deprives our republican example of its just influence in the world — enables the enemies of free institutions, with plausibility, to taunt us as hypocrites — causes the real friends of freedom to doubt our sincerity, and especially because it forces so many really good men amongst ourselves into an open war with the very fundamental principles of civil liberty — criticizing the Declaration of Independence, and insisting that there is no right principle of action but  self-interest . 20
Drawing on remnants of the old Whig, Free Soil, Liberty and Democratic parties, he was instrumental in forming the new Republican Party. In a stirring campaign, the Republicans carried Illinois in 1854 and elected a senator. Lincoln was the obvious choice, but to keep the new party balanced he allowed the election to go to an ex-Democrat
Lyman Trumbull . At the Republican convention in 1856, Lincoln placed second in the contest to become the party's candidate for Vice-President.
In 1857-58, Douglas broke with President
Buchanan , leading to a fight for control of the Democratic Party. Some eastern Republicans even favored the reelection of Douglas in 1858, since he had led the opposition to the
Lecompton Constitution , which would have admitted Kansas as a
slave state . Accepting the Republican nomination for Senate in 1858, Lincoln delivered
his famous speech : "'A house divided against itself cannot stand.'(
Mark  3:25) I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free. I do not expect the Union to be dissolved — I do not expect the house to fall — but I do expect it will cease to be divided. It will become all one thing, or all the other." 21  The speech created an evocative image of the danger of disunion caused by the slavery debate, and rallied Republicans across the north.
Lincoln-Douglas debates of 1858
Main article:
Lincoln-Douglas debates of 1858
The 1858 campaign featured the Lincoln-Douglas debates, a famous contest on slavery. Lincoln warned that "
The Slave Power " was threatening the values of
republicanism , while Douglas emphasized the supremacy of
democracy , as set forth in his
Freeport Doctrine , which said that local settlers should be free to choose whether to allow slavery or not. Though the Republican legislative candidates won more
popular vote s, the Democrats won more seats, and the legislature reelected Douglas to the Senate. Nevertheless, Lincoln's speeches on the issue transformed him into a national political star.
1860 Presidential Election
Lincoln in
New York City  the day of his famous
Cooper Union speech , February 27, 1860 by
Mathew Brady
"The Rail Candidate" - Lincoln's 1860 candidacy is held up by the slavery issue (slave on left) and party organization (
New York Tribune   editor
Horace Greeley  on right).
Main article:
United States presidential election, 1860
Lincoln was chosen as the Republican candidate for the 1860 election for several reasons. His expressed views on slavery were seen as more moderate than those of rivals
William H. Seward  and
Salmon P. Chase . His "Western" origins also appealed to the newer states: other contenders, especially those with more governmental experience, had acquired enemies within the party and were weak in the critical western states, while Lincoln was perceived as a moderate who could win the West. Most Republicans agreed with Lincoln that the North was the aggrieved party as the Slave Power tightened its grasp on the national government. Throughout the 1850s he denied that there would ever be a civil war, and his supporters repeatedly rejected claims that his election would incite secession. 22 &#91;need&nbsp;&#32;&#93; On May 9-10, 1860, the Illinois Republican State Convention was held in
Decatur . At this convention, Lincoln received his first endorsement to run for the presidency.
Throughout the general election, Lincoln did not campaign or give speeches. This was handled by the state and county Republican organizations, who used the latest techniques to sustain party enthusiasm and thus obtain high turnout. There was little effort to convert non-Republicans, and there was virtually no campaigning in the South except for a few border cities such as
St. Louis, Missouri , and
Wheeling, Virginia ; indeed, the party did not even run a slate in most of the South. In the North, there were thousands of Republican speakers, tons of campaign posters and leaflets, and thousands of newspaper editorials. These focused first on the party platform, and second on Lincoln's life story, making the most of his boyhood poverty, his pioneer background, his native genius, and his rise from obscurity. His nicknames, "Honest Abe" and "the Rail-Splitter," were exploited to the full. The goal was to emphasize the superior power of "free labor," whereby a common farm boy could work his way to the top by his own efforts. 23
On November 6, 1860, Lincoln was elected as the 16th President of the United States, beating Democrat Stephen A. Douglas,
John C. Breckinridge  of the Southern Democrats, and
John Bell  of the new
Constitutional Union Party . He was the first Republican president, winning entirely on the strength of his support in the North: he was not even on the ballot in nine states in the South, and won only 2 of 996 counties in the other Southern states. Lincoln gained 1,865,908 votes (39.9% of the total), for 180 electoral votes; Douglas, 1,380,202 (29.5%) for 12 electoral votes; Breckenridge, 848,019 (18.1%) for 72 electoral votes; and Bell, 590,901 (12.5%) for 39 electoral votes. There were
fusion tickets  in some states, but even if his opponents had combined in every state, Lincoln had a majority vote in all but two of the states in which he won the electoral votes and would still have won the electoral college and the election.
Presidency and the Civil War
Main article:
Origins of the American Civil War
With the emergence of the Republicans as the nation's first major sectional party by the mid-1850s, politics became the stage on which sectional tensions were played out. Although much of the West&nbsp;&ndash;  the focal point of sectional tensions&nbsp;&ndash;  was unfit for cotton cultivation, Southern secessionists read the political fallout as a sign that their power in national politics was rapidly weakening. Before, the slave system had been buttressed to an extent by the Democratic Party, which was increasingly seen as representing a more pro-Southern position that unfairly permitted Southerners to prevail in the nation's territories and to dominate national policy before the Civil War. But they suffered a significant reverse in the electoral realignment of the mid-1850s. 1860 was a critical election that marked a stark change in existing patterns of party loyalties among groups of voters; Abraham Lincoln's election was a watershed in the balance of power of competing national and parochial interests and affiliations.
Secession winter 1860&ndash;1861
Main articles:
Baltimore Plot &#32;and&#32;
Cornerstone Speech
As Lincoln's election became more likely, secessionists made it clear that their states would leave the Union. On December 20, 1860,
South Carolina  took the lead. By February 1, 1861, South Carolina was followed by six other cotton-growing states in the deep South. The seven states soon declared themselves to be a new nation, the
Confederate States of America . The upper South (
Delaware ,
Maryland ,
Virginia ,
North Carolina ,
Tennessee ,
Kentucky ,
Missouri , and
Arkansas ) listened to, but initially rejected, the secessionist appeal. President Buchanan and President-elect Lincoln refused to recognize the Confederacy.
Attempts at compromise, such as the
Crittenden Compromise  which would have extended the Missouri line of 1820, were discussed. Despite support for the Crittenden Compromise among some Republicans, Lincoln denounced it in private letters, saying "either the Missouri line extended, or... Pop. Sov. would lose us everything we gained in the election; that filibustering for all South of us, and making slave states of it, would follow in spite of us, under either plan", 24
while other Republicans publicly stated it "would amount to a perpetual covenant of war against every people, tribe, and state owning a foot of land between here and Tierra del Fuego [at the far end of South America]." 25
President-elect Lincoln
evaded possible assassins in Baltimore , and on February 23, 1861, arrived in disguise in Washington, D.C.
A photograph of the March 4, 1861 inauguration of Abraham Lincoln in front of
United States Capitol .
At his inauguration on March 4, 1861, the
German American
Turners  formed Lincoln's bodyguard; and a sizable garrison of federal troops was also present, ready to protect the capital from Confederate invasion and local insurrection. In his
First Inaugural  Address, Lincoln declared, "I hold that in contemplation of universal law and of the Constitution the Union of these States is perpetual. Perpetuity is implied, if not expressed, in the fundamental law of all national governments," arguing further that the purpose of the
United States Constitution  was "to form a more perfect union" than the
Articles of Confederation  which were  explicitly  perpetual, thus the Constitution too was perpetual. He asked rhetorically that even were the Constitution a simple contract, would it not require the agreement of all parties to rescind it?
Also in his inaugural address, in a final attempt to reunite the states and prevent the looming war, Lincoln supported the pending
Corwin Amendment  to the Constitution, which had already passed Congress. This amendment, which explicitly protected slavery in those states in which it already existed, had more appeal to the critical border states than to the states that had already declared their separation.
By the time Lincoln took office, the Confederacy was an established fact, and no leaders of the insurrection proposed rejoining the Union on any terms. No compromise was found because a compromise was deemed virtually impossible. Buchanan might have allowed the southern states to secede, and some Republicans recommended that. However, conservative Democratic nationalists, such as
Jeremiah S. Black ,
Joseph Holt , and
Edwin M. Stanton  had taken control of Buchanan's cabinet around January 1, 1861, and refused to accept secession. Lincoln and nearly every Republican leader adopted this position by March 1861: the Union could not be dismantled. Believing that a peaceful solution was still possible, Lincoln decided to not take any action against the South unless the Unionists themselves were attacked first. This finally happened in April 1861.
Historian
Allan Nevins  argues that Lincoln made three miscalculations in believing that he could preserve the Union, hold government property, and still avoid war. He "temporarily underrated the gravity of the crisis", overestimated the strength of Unionist sentiment in the South and border states, and misunderstood the conditional support of Unionists in the border states. 26  In connection with Nevins's conclusions, it is interesting to note an incident from this period reported in the memoirs of
William Tecumseh Sherman . Then a civilian, Sherman visited Lincoln in the White House during inauguration week, with his brother, Ohio Republican John Sherman. This meeting left the future General Sherman "sadly disappointed" at Lincoln's seeming failure to realize that "the country was sleeping on a volcano" and the South was "'preparing for war.'" 27
Fighting begins: 1861&ndash;1862
Main article:
American Civil War
In April 1861, after Union troops at
Fort Sumter  were fired upon and forced to surrender, Lincoln called on the governors of every state to send detachments totaling 75,000 troops to recapture forts, protect the capital, and "preserve the Union," which in his view still existed intact despite the actions of the seceding states.
Virginia , which had repeatedly warned Lincoln that it would not allow an invasion of its territory or join an attack on another state, responded by seceding, along with
North Carolina ,
Tennessee , and
Arkansas .
The slave states of
Missouri ,
Kentucky ,
Maryland , and
Delaware  did not secede, and Lincoln urgently negotiated with state leaders there, promising not to interfere with slavery. After the fighting started, he had rebel leaders arrested in all the border areas (especially in Maryland) and held in military prisons without trial. Over 18,000 were arrested, though none were executed. One,
Clement Vallandigham , was exiled; but all of the remainder were released, usually after two or three months ( see :
Ex parte Merryman ).
Emancipation Proclamation
Main articles:
Abraham Lincoln on slavery &#32;and&#32;
Emancipation Proclamation
In July 1862, Congress moved to free the slaves by passing the Second Confiscation Act. The goal was to weaken the rebellion, which was led and controlled by slave owners. While it did not abolish the legal institution of slavery (the
Thirteenth Amendment  did that), the Act showed that Lincoln had the support of Congress in liberating slaves owned by rebels. This new law was implemented with Lincoln's "Emancipation Proclamation."
Ending slavery was always a primary goal of the Lincoln administration. However, the American public was slow to embrace the idea. In a shrewdly penned letter to Horace Greeley, editor of The New York Tribune, Lincoln masked his goal of ending slavery by making it subservient to the cause of preserving the union:
I would save the Union. I would save it the shortest way under the Constitution. The sooner the national authority can be restored; the nearer the Union will be "the Union as it was."&nbsp;... My paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union, and is not either to save or to destroy slavery. If I could save the Union without freeing any slave I would do it, and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone I would also do that. What I do about slavery, and the colored race, I do because I believe it helps to save the Union; and what I forbear, I forbear because I do not believe it would help to save the Union. I shall do less whenever I shall believe what I am doing hurts the cause, and I shall do more whenever I shall believe doing more will help the cause. I shall try to correct errors when shown to be errors; and I shall adopt new views so fast as they shall appear to be true views. I have here stated my purpose according to my view of official duty; and I intend no modification of my oft-expressed personal wish that all men everywhere could be free. 28
The
Emancipation Proclamation , announced on September 22 and put into effect on January 1, 1863, freed slaves in territories not under Union control. As Union armies advanced south, more slaves were liberated until all of them in Confederate hands (over three million) were freed. Lincoln later said: "I never, in my life, felt more certain that I was doing right, than I do in signing this paper." The proclamation made the abolition of slavery in the rebel states an official war goal. Lincoln then threw his energies into passage of the Thirteenth Amendment to permanently abolish slavery throughout the nation. 29
In September 1862, thirteen northern governors met in
Altoona, Pennsylvania , at the Loyal
War Governors' Conference  to discuss the Proclamation and Union war effort. In the end, the state executives fully supported the president's Proclamation and also suggested the removal of General
George B. McClellan  as commander of the Union's
Army of the Potomac . 30
For some time, Lincoln continued earlier plans to set up
colonies  for the newly freed slaves. He commented favorably on colonization in the Emancipation Proclamation, but all attempts at such a massive undertaking failed. As
Frederick Douglass  observed, Lincoln was, "The first great man that I talked with in the United States freely who in no single instance reminded me of the difference between himself and myself, of the difference of color." 31
Gettysburg Address
Main article:
Gettysburg Address
Although the
Battle of Gettysburg  was a Union victory, it was also the bloodiest battle of the war and dealt a blow to Lincoln's war effort. As the Union Army decreased in numbers due to casualties, more soldiers were needed to replace the ranks. Lincoln's 1863 military drafts were considered "odious" among many in the north, particularly immigrants. The
New York Draft Riots  of July, 1863 were the most notable manifestation of this discontent.
Writing to Lincoln in September 1863, the
Governor of Pennsylvania ,
Andrew Curtin , warned that political sentiments were turning against Lincoln and the war effort:
If the election were to occur now, the result would be extremely doubtful, and although most of our discreet friends are sanguine of the result, my impression is, the chances would be against us. The draft is very odious in the State... the Democratic leaders have succeeded in exciting prejudice and passion, and have infused their poison into the minds of the people to a very large extent, and the changes are against us. 32
At the dedication of the
Soldiers' National Cemetery  in
Gettysburg, Pennsylvania , on November 19, beginning with the now-iconic 33  phrase "Four
score  and seven years ago...", Lincoln referred to the events of the
Civil War  and described the ceremony at Gettysburg as an opportunity not only to dedicate the grounds of a cemetery, but also to consecrate the living in the struggle to ensure that "government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth".
1864 election and second inauguration
Main article:
United States presidential election, 1864
After Union victories at
Gettysburg ,
Vicksburg  and
Chattanooga  in 1863, overall victory seemed at hand, and Lincoln promoted
Ulysses S. Grant  General-in-Chief ( March 12, 1864). When the spring campaigns turned into bloody stalemates, Lincoln supported Grant's strategy of wearing down
Lee's  Confederate army at the cost of heavy Union casualties. With an election looming, he easily defeated efforts to deny his renomination. At the Convention, the Republican Party selected
Andrew Johnson , a
War Democrat  from the Southern state of Tennessee, as his running mate in order to form a broader coalition. They ran on the new
Union Party  ticket uniting Republicans and War Democrats.
The only known photographs of Lincoln giving a speech were taken as he delivered his second inaugural address. Here, he stands in the center, with papers in his hand.
Nevertheless, Republicans across the country feared that Lincoln would be defeated. Acknowledging this fear, Lincoln wrote and signed a pledge that, if he should lose the election, he would still defeat the Confederacy before turning over the White House: 34
This morning, as for some days past, it seems exceedingly probable that this Administration will not be re-elected. Then it will be my duty to so co-operate with the President elect, as to save the Union between the election and the inauguration; as he will have secured his election on such ground that he cannot possibly save it afterwards. 35
Lincoln did not show the pledge to his cabinet, but asked them to sign the sealed envelope.
While the Democratic platform followed the
Peace wing  of the party and called the war a "failure," their candidate, General
George B. McClellan , supported the war and repudiated the platform.
Lincoln provided Grant with new replacements and mobilized his party to support Grant and win local support for the war effort.
Sherman's  capture of
Atlanta  in September ended defeatist jitters; the Democratic Party was deeply split, with some leaders and most soldiers openly for Lincoln; the Union party was united and energized, and Lincoln was easily reelected in a landslide. He won all but two states, capturing 212 of 233 electoral votes.
On March 4, 1865, Lincoln delivered his
second inaugural address , his favorite of all his speeches. At this time, a victory over the rebels was at hand, slavery was dead, and Lincoln was looking to the future.
Fondly do we hope — fervently do we pray — that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away. Yet, if God wills that it continue, until all the wealth piled by the bond-man's two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash, shall be paid by another drawn with the sword, as was said three thousand years ago, so still it must be said "the judgments of the Lord, are true and righteous altogether." With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right, as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in; to bind up the nation's wounds; to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow, and his orphan — to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace, among ourselves, and with all nations. 36
Conducting the war effort
ambox-content" style=""
This section needs additional  for .
Please help
improve this article  by adding . Unsourced material may be and removed.  (September 2008)''
“Running the ‘Machine’”: An 1864 political cartoon featuring Lincoln;
William Fessenden ,
Edwin Stanton ,
William Seward  and
Gideon Welles  take a swing at the Lincoln administration
The war was a source of constant frustration for the president, and occupied nearly all of his time. He had a contentious relationship with General
McClellan , who became general-in-chief of all the Union armies in the wake of the embarrassing Union defeat at the
First Battle of Bull Run  and after the retirement of
Winfield Scott  in late 1861. Despite his inexperience in military affairs, Lincoln wanted to take an active part in determining war strategy. His priorities were twofold: to ensure that Washington, D.C. was well defended; and to conduct an aggressive war effort in the hope of ending the war quickly and appeasing the Northern public and press. McClellan, a youthful
West Point  graduate and railroad executive called back to active military service, took a more cautious approach. He took several months to plan and execute his
Peninsula Campaign , with the objective of capturing
Richmond  by moving the
Army of the Potomac  by boat to the
peninsula  between the
James  and
York Rivers . McClellan's delay irritated Lincoln, as did his insistence that no troops were needed to defend Washington, D.C. Lincoln insisted on holding some of McClellan's troops to defend the capital, a decision McClellan blamed for the ultimate failure of the Peninsula Campaign.
McClellan, a lifelong
Democrat  who was temperamentally conservative, was relieved as general-in-chief after releasing his  Harrison's Landing Letter , where he offered unsolicited political advice to Lincoln urging caution in the war effort. McClellan's letter incensed Radical Republicans, who successfully pressured Lincoln to appoint
John Pope , a Republican, as head of the new
Army of Virginia . Pope complied with Lincoln's strategic desire to move toward Richmond from the north, thus protecting the capital from attack. But Pope was soundly defeated at the
Second Battle of Bull Run  in the summer of 1862, forcing the Army of the Potomac to defend Washington for a second time. In response to his failure, Pope was sent to Minnesota to fight the
Sioux .
An 1864
Mathew Brady  photo depicts President Lincoln reading a book with his youngest son,
Tad
Panicked by Lee's invasion of Maryland, Lincoln restored McClellan to command of all forces around Washington in time for the
Battle of Antietam  (September 1862). The ensuing Union victory enabled Lincoln to release his Emancipation Proclamation, but he relieved McClellan of his command shortly after the 1862 midterm elections and appointed Republican
Ambrose Burnside  to head the Army of the Potomac. Burnside had promised to follow through on Lincoln's strategic vision for a strong offensive against Lee and Richmond. After Burnside was stunningly defeated at
Fredericksburg ,
Joseph Hooker  was given the command, despite his idle talk about the necessity for a military dictator to win the war and a past history of criticizing his commanders. 37  Hooker was routed by Lee at the
Battle of Chancellorsville  (May 1863), and relieved of command early in the subsequent
Gettysburg Campaign  replaced by
George Meade .
After the Union victory at Gettysburg, Meade's failure to pursue Lee and months of inactivity for the Army of the Potomac persuaded Lincoln to bring in a western general,
Ulysses S. Grant . Grant already had a solid string of victories in the Western Theater, including the battles of Vicksburg and
Chattanooga . Responding to criticism of Grant, Lincoln was quoted as saying, "I cannot spare this man. He fights." Grant waged his bloody
Overland Campaign  in 1864 with a strategy of a
war of attrition , characterized by high Union losses at battles such as the
Wilderness  and
Cold Harbor , but by proportionately higher Confederate losses. His invasion campaign eventually bottled Lee up in the
Siege of Petersburg , so that Grant could take Richmond, and bring the war to a close in the spring of 1865.
Lincoln, in a
top hat , with
Allan Pinkerton  and Major General
John Alexander McClernand  at Antietam
Lincoln authorized Grant to target civilians and infrastructure, hoping to destroy the South's morale and weaken its economic ability to continue fighting. This allowed Generals
Sherman  and
Sheridan  to destroy farms and towns in the
Shenandoah Valley ,
Georgia , and South Carolina. The damage caused by
Sherman's March to the Sea  through Georgia totaled in excess of $100 million by Sherman's own estimate. 38
Lincoln had a star-crossed record as a military leader, possessing a keen understanding of strategic points (such as the Mississippi River and the fortress city of Vicksburg) and the importance of defeating the enemy's army, rather than simply capturing cities. He had, however, limited success in motivating his commanders to adopt his strategies until late 1863, when he found a man who shared his vision of the war in Ulysses S. Grant. Only then could he insist on using
African American  troops and relentlessly pursue a series of coordinated offensives in multiple theaters.
Throughout the war, Lincoln showed a keen curiosity with the military campaigns. He spent hours at the
War Department
telegraph  office, reading dispatches from his generals. He visited battle sites frequently, and seemed fascinated by watching scenes of war. During
Jubal Anderson Early 's
raid on Washington, D.C.  in 1864, Lincoln had to be told to duck to avoid being shot while observing the battle.
Reconstruction
Main article:
Reconstruction era of the United States
Reconstruction began during the war as Lincoln and his associates pondered questions of how to reintegrate the Southern states and what to do with Confederate leaders and the freed slaves. Lincoln led the "moderates" regarding Reconstructionist policy, and was usually opposed by the
Radical Republicans , under
Thaddeus Stevens  in the House and
Charles Sumner  and
Benjamin Wade  in the Senate (though he cooperated with these men on most other issues). Determined to find a course that would reunite the nation and not alienate the South, Lincoln urged that speedy elections under generous terms be held throughout the war in areas behind Union lines. His
Amnesty Proclamation  of December 8, 1863, offered pardons to those who had not held a Confederate civil office, had not mistreated Union prisoners, and would sign an oath of allegiance. 39  Critical decisions had to be made as state after state was reconquered. Of special importance were
Tennessee , where Lincoln appointed
Andrew Johnson  as governor, and
Louisiana , where Lincoln attempted a plan that would restore statehood when 10% of the voters agreed to it. The Radicals thought this policy too lenient, and passed their own plan, the
Wade-Davis Bill , in 1864. When Lincoln
pocket-vetoed  the bill, the Radicals retaliated by refusing to seat representatives elected from Louisiana, Arkansas, and Tennessee. 40
Near the end of the war, Lincoln made an extended visit to Grant's headquarters at City Point, Virginia. This allowed the president to visit Richmond after it was taken by the Union forces and to make a public gesture of sitting at
Jefferson Davis's  own desk, symbolically saying to the nation that the President of the United States held authority over the entire land. He was greeted at the city as a conquering hero by freed slaves, whose sentiments were epitomized by one admirer's quote, "I know I am free for I have seen the face of Father Abraham and have felt him." When a general asked Lincoln how the defeated Confederates should be treated, Lincoln replied, "Let 'em up easy." 41  Lincoln arrived back in Washington on the evening of April 9, 1865, the day Lee surrendered at
Appomattox Court House  in Virginia. The war was effectively over. The other rebel armies surrendered soon after, and there was no subsequent guerrilla warfare. 42
Home front
Redefining Republicanism
One of the last photographs of Lincoln, likely taken in February 1865
Lincoln's
rhetoric  defined the issues of the war for the nation, the world, and posterity. The
Gettysburg Address  defied Lincoln's own prediction that "the world will little note, nor long remember what we say here." His second inaugural address is also greatly admired and often quoted.
In recent years, historians have stressed Lincoln's use of and redefinition of
republican values . As early as the 1850s, a time when most political rhetoric focused on the sanctity of the
Constitution , Lincoln shifted emphasis to the
Declaration of Independence  as the foundation of American political values — what he called the "sheet anchor" of republicanism. 43  The Declaration's emphasis on freedom and equality for all, rather than the Constitution's tolerance of slavers, shifted the debate. As Diggins concludes regarding the highly influential
Cooper Union speech , "Lincoln presented Americans a theory of history that offers a profound contribution to the theory and destiny of republicanism itself." 44  His position gained strength because he highlighted the moral basis of republicanism, rather than its legalisms. 45  46  Nevertheless, in 1861 Lincoln justified the war in terms of legalisms (the Constitution was a contract, and for one party to get out of a contract all the other parties had to agree), and then in terms of the national duty to guarantee a "republican form of government" in every state. 47  That duty was also the principle underlying federal intervention in
Reconstruction .
In his
Gettysburg Address  Lincoln redefined the American nation, arguing that it was born not in 1789 but in 1776, "conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal." He declared that the sacrifices of battle had rededicated the nation to the propositions of democracy and equality, "that this nation shall have a new birth of freedom — and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth." By emphasizing the centrality of the nation, he rebuffed the claims of
state sovereignty . While some critics say Lincoln moved too far and too fast, they agree that he dedicated the nation to values that marked "a new founding of the nation." 48
Civil liberties suspended
During the Civil War, Lincoln appropriated powers no previous President had wielded: he used his war powers to proclaim a
blockade , suspended the writ of
habeas corpus , spent money without congressional authorization, and imprisoned 18,000 suspected Confederate sympathizers without trial.
Domestic measures
Lincoln believed in the Whig theory of the presidency, which left Congress to write the laws while he signed them,
veto ing only those bills that threatened his war powers. Thus, he signed the
Homestead Act  in 1862, making millions of acres of government-held land in the West available for purchase at very low cost. The
Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act , also signed in 1862, provided government grants for
agricultural
universities  in each state. The Pacific Railway Acts of 1862 and 1864 granted federal support for the construction of the United States'
First Transcontinental Railroad , which was completed in 1869. Other important legislation involved economic matters, including the first
income tax  and higher
tariff s. Also included was the creation of the system of national banks by the
National Banking Act s of 1863, 1864, and 1865, which allowed the creation of a strong national financial system. Congress created and Lincoln approved the
Department of Agriculture  in 1862, although that institution would not become a Cabinet-level department until 1889.
The Legal Tender Act of 1862 established the
United States Note , the first
paper currency  in United States history. This was done to increase the money supply to pay for fighting the war.
During the war, Lincoln's
Treasury Department  effectively controlled all
cotton  trade in the occupied South — the most dramatic incursion of federal controls on the economy.
In 1862, Lincoln sent a senior general,
John Pope , to put down the "
Sioux Uprising " in
Minnesota . Presented with 303
death warrant s for convicted
Santee Dakota  who had massacred innocent farmers, Lincoln affirmed 39 of these for
execution  (one was later
reprieve d).
Medical history
Illnesses included:
frostbitten  feet,
malaria ,
physical trauma  and
smallpox . 49  Claims that Lincoln had
syphilis  about 1835 have been controversial, but a recent analysis finds them credible. 50
As a child, Lincoln was tall for his age. He reached his adult height of 6&nbsp;feet 4&nbsp;inches (1.9&nbsp;m) no later than age 21. Friends noticed his arms, legs, hands, and feet were long. Although well muscled as a young adult, he was always thin. Fragmentary evidence says he weighed around 170&nbsp;pounds before the Presidency, but lost weight while in the White House. Based on Lincoln's unusual physical appearance, Dr. Abraham Gordon proposed in 1962 that Lincoln had
Marfan syndrome . 51  Lincoln's unremarkable
cardiovascular  history and his normal visual acuity have been the chief objections to the theory, and today the diagnosis is considered unlikely. 52  Testing Lincoln's
DNA  for Marfan syndrome was contemplated in the 1990s, but such a test was not performed.
In 2007, Dr. John Sotos proposed that Lincoln had
multiple endocrine neoplasia , type 2B (MEN2B). 53  This theory suggests Lincoln had all the major features of the disease: a marfan-like body shape, large, bumpy lips,
constipation ,
hypotonia , a history compatible with
cancer  and a family history of the disorder - his sons
Eddie ,
Willie , and
Tad , and probably his mother. The "mole" on Lincoln's right cheek, the asymmetry of his face, his large jaw, his drooping eyelid, and "pseudo-depression" are also suggested as manifestations of MEN2B. Lincoln's longevity is the principal challenge to the MEN2B theory, which could be proven by DNA testing.
Assassination
Main article:
Abraham Lincoln assassination
Further information:
Abraham Lincoln's burial and exhumation
The assassination of Abraham Lincoln. From left to right:
Henry Rathbone ,
Clara Harris , Mary Todd Lincoln, Abraham Lincoln and
John Wilkes Booth
Originally,
John Wilkes Booth , a well-known actor and a Confederate spy from Maryland, had formulated a plan to
kidnap  Lincoln in exchange for the release of Confederate prisoners. After attending an April 11 speech in which Lincoln promoted voting rights for blacks, an incensed Booth changed his plans and determined to assassinate the president. 54  Learning that the President and
First Lady  would be attending
Ford's Theatre , he laid his plans, assigning his co-conspirators to assassinate
Vice President
Andrew Johnson  and
Secretary of State
William H. Seward .
Without his main bodyguard
Ward Hill Lamon , to whom he related his famous dream regarding his own assassination, Lincoln left to attend the play
Our American Cousin   on April 14, 1865. As a lone bodyguard wandered, and Lincoln sat in his state box (Box 7) in the balcony, Booth crept up behind the President and waited for what he thought would be the funniest line of the play ("You sock-dologizing old man-trap"), hoping the laughter would muffle the noise of the gunshot. When the laughter began, Booth jumped into the box and aimed a single-shot, round-slug 0.44 caliber
Henry Deringer  at his head, firing at point-blank range. Major
Henry Rathbone  momentarily grappled with Booth but was cut by Booth's knife. Booth then leapt to the stage and shouted "
Sic semper tyrannis ! " (
Latin :  Thus always to tyrants ) and escaped, despite a broken leg suffered in the leap. 55  A twelve-day manhunt ensued, in which Booth was chased by Federal agents (under the direction of
Secretary of War
Edwin M. Stanton ). He was eventually cornered in a Virginia barn house and shot, dying of his wounds soon after.
Lincoln's
funeral train  carried his remains, as well as 300 mourners and the casket of his son, William, 1,654&nbsp;miles (2,661&nbsp;km) to Illinois
An army surgeon, Doctor
Charles Leale , initially assessed Lincoln's wound as
mortal . The President was taken across the street from the theater to the
Petersen House , where he lay in a coma for nine hours before dying. Several physicians attended Lincoln, including
U.S. Army Surgeon General  Joseph K. Barnes of the
Army Medical Museum . Using a probe, Barnes located some fragments of Lincoln's skull and the ball lodged 6&nbsp;inches (15&nbsp;cm) inside his brain. Lincoln never regained consciousness and was pronounced dead at 7:22:10 a.m. April 15, 1865. There is some disagreement among historians as to Stanton's words after Lincoln died. All agree that he began "Now he belongs to the..." with some stating he said "ages" while others believe he said "angels." 55  After Lincoln's body was returned to the
White House , a brain-only autopsy was performed, and his body was prepared for his
lying in repose  in the
East Room . He was the first president to be assassinated or to
lie in state .
The Army Medical Museum, now named the National Museum of Health and Medicine, has retained in its collection several artifacts relating to the assassination. Currently on display are the bullet that was fired from the
Philadelphia Deringer  pistol, the probe used by Barnes, pieces of Lincoln's skull and hair, and the surgeon's cuff stained with Lincoln's blood. The chair in which Lincoln was shot is on display at the
Henry Ford Museum  in
Detroit ,
Michigan .
Lincoln's body was carried by train in a grand funeral procession through several states on its way back to Illinois. 55  While much of the nation mourned him as the savior of the United States,
Copperheads  celebrated the death of a man they considered a tyrant. The
Lincoln Tomb  in Oak Ridge Cemetery in Springfield, is 177&nbsp;feet (54&nbsp;m) tall and, by 1874, was surmounted with several bronze statues of Lincoln. To prevent repeated attempts to steal Lincoln's body and hold it for ransom,
Robert Todd Lincoln  had Lincoln
exhumed  and reinterred in concrete several feet thick in 1901.
Presidential appointments
Administration and cabinet
Lincoln was known for appointing political rivals to high positions in his cabinet to keep in line all factions of his party — and to let them battle each other and not combine against him. Historians agree that, except for
Simon Cameron , it was a highly effective group.
Portrait of Lincoln by
George P.A. Healy
Supreme Court
Lincoln appointed the following Justices to the
Supreme Court of the United States :
Noah Haynes Swayne   – 1862
Samuel Freeman Miller   – 1862
David Davis   – 1862
Stephen Johnson Field   – 1863
Salmon P. Chase   –
Chief Justice  – 1864
Major presidential acts
While Lincoln is usually portrayed bearded, he first grew a beard in late 1860, at the suggestion of 11-year-old
Grace Bedell  and others
Signed as President
Revenue Act of 1861
Homestead Act
Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act
Revenue Act of 1862
Pacific Railway Acts of 1862 and 1864
United States Department of Agriculture  (1862)
National Banking Act of 1863
Revenue Act of 1864
States admitted to the Union
West Virginia  – 1863
Nevada  – 1864
Religious and philosophical beliefs
Further information:
Abraham Lincoln and religion
In March 1860 in a speech in
New Haven ,
Connecticut , Lincoln said, with respect to slavery, “Whenever this question shall be settled, it must be settled on some philosophical basis. No policy that does not rest upon some philosophical public opinion can be permanently maintained." The philosophical basis for Lincoln’s beliefs regarding slavery and other issues of the day require that Lincoln be examined "seriously as a man of ideas." Lincoln was a strong supporter of the American
Whig  version of
liberal
capitalism  who, more than most politicians of the time, was able to express his ideas within the context of Nineteenth Century religious beliefs. 56
There were few people who strongly or directly influenced Lincoln’s moral and intellectual development and perspectives. There was no teacher, mentor, church leader, community leader, or peer that Lincoln would credit in later years as a strong influence on his intellectual development. Lacking a formal education, Lincoln’s personal philosophy was shaped by "an amazingly retentive memory and a passion for reading and learning." It was Lincoln’s reading, rather than his relationships, that were most influential in shaping his personal beliefs. 57  58
Lincoln did, even as a boy, largely reject
organized religion , but the
Calvinistic  "doctrine of necessity" would remain a factor throughout his life. In 1846 Lincoln described the effect of this doctrine as "that the human mind is impelled to action, or held in rest by some power, over which the mind itself has no control." 59  In April 1864, in justifying his actions in regard to Emancipation, Lincoln wrote, "I claim not to have controlled events, but confess plainly that events have controlled me. Now, at the end of three years struggle the nation's condition is not what either party, or any man devised, or expected. God alone can claim it." 60
As Lincoln matured, and especially during his term as president, the idea of a divine will somehow interacting with human affairs more and more influenced his public expressions. On a personal level, the death of his son Willie in February 1862 may have caused Lincoln to look towards religion for answers and solace. 61  After Willie’s death, in the summer or early fall of 1862, Lincoln attempted to put on paper his private musings on why, from a divine standpoint, the severity of the war was necessary:
The
will  of God prevails. In great contests each party claims to act in accordance with the will of God. Both may be, and one must be, wrong. God cannot be for and against the same thing at the same time. In the present civil war it is quite possible that God's purpose is something different from the purpose of either party&mdash;and yet the human instrumentalities, working just as they do, are of the best adaptation to effect his purpose. I am almost ready to say this is probably true&mdash;that God wills this contest, and wills that it shall not end yet. By his mere quiet power, on the minds of the now contestants, He could have either saved or destroyed the Union without a human contest. Yet the contest began. And having begun He could give the final victory to either side any day. Yet the contest proceeds. 62
Lincoln’s religious
skepticism  was fueled by his exposure to the ideas of the
Lockean
Enlightenment  and classical liberalism, especially
economic liberalism . 57  Consistent with the common practice of the Whig party, Lincoln would often use the
Declaration of Independence  as the philosophical and moral expression of these two philosophies. 63  In a February 22, 1861 speech at Independence Hall in Philadelphia Lincoln said,
I have never had a feeling politically that did not spring from the sentiments embodied in the Declaration of Independence.&nbsp;… It was not the mere matter of the separation of the Colonies from the motherland; but that sentiment in the Declaration of Independence which gave liberty, not alone to the people of this country, but, I hope, to the world, for all future time. It was that which gave promise that in due time the weight would be lifted from the shoulders of all men. This is a sentiment embodied in the Declaration of Independence. 64
He found in the Declaration justification for Whig economic policy and opposition to territorial expansion and the
nativist  platform of the
Know Nothing s. In claiming that all men were created free, Lincoln and the Whigs argued that this freedom required economic advancement, expanded education, territory to grow, and the ability of the nation to absorb the growing immigrant population. 65
It was the Declaration of Independence, rather than the Bible, that Lincoln most relied on in order to oppose any further territorial expansion of slavery. He saw the Declaration as more than a political document. To him, as well as to many abolitionists and other antislavery leaders, it was, foremost, a moral document that had forever determined valuable criteria in shaping the future of the nation. 66
Legacy and memorials
Further information:
Cultural depictions of Abraham Lincoln
The Apotheosis  of Abraham Lincoln, greeted by
George Washington  in heaven (an 1860s work)
Lincoln's death made the President a
martyr  to many. Repeated polls of historians have ranked Lincoln as among the
greatest presidents in U.S. history , often appearing in the first position. Among contemporary admirers, Lincoln is usually seen as personifying classical values of honesty and integrity, as well as respect for individual and minority rights, and human freedom in general.
Many American organizations of all purposes and agendas continue to cite his name and image, with interests ranging from the
gay rights -supporting
Log Cabin Republicans  to the
insurance  corporation
Lincoln National Corporation . The
Lincoln automobile  is also named after him. The
ballistic missile
submarine
Abraham Lincoln  (SSBN-602)  and the
aircraft carrier
Abraham Lincoln  (CVN-72)  were named in his honor. Also, the
Liberty ship  SS  Nancy Hanks  was named for his mother. During the
Spanish Civil War , the American faction of the
International Brigades  named themselves the
Abraham Lincoln Brigade .
Lincoln has been memorialized in many city names, notably the
capital of Nebraska .
Lincoln, Illinois , is the only city to be named for Abraham Lincoln before he became President. Lincoln's name and image appear in numerous places. These include the
Lincoln Memorial  in Washington, D.C., the U.S.
Lincoln $5 bill  and the
Lincoln cent , Lincoln's sculpture on the
Mount Rushmore , and the
Lincoln Home National Historic Site  in Springfield, Illinois. In addition,
New Salem, Illinois  (a reconstruction of Lincoln's early adult hometown),
Ford's Theatre , and Petersen House (where he died) are all preserved as museums. The Lincoln Shrine in
Redlands, California , is located behind the A.K. Smiley Public Library. The
state nickname  for Illinois is  Land of Lincoln .
Counties  in 18
U.S. state s (
Arkansas ,
Colorado ,
Idaho ,
Kansas ,
Maine ,
Minnesota ,
Mississippi ,
Montana ,
Nebraska ,
Nevada ,
New Mexico ,
Oklahoma ,
Oregon ,
South Dakota ,
West Virginia ,
Washington ,
Wisconsin , and
Wyoming ) are named after Lincoln.
Abraham Lincoln's birthday, February 12, was formerly a national holiday, now commemorated as
Presidents' Day . However, it is still observed in Illinois and many other states as a separate legal holiday,
Lincoln's Birthday . A dozen states have legal holidays celebrating the third Monday in February as 'Presidents' Day' as a combination Washington-Lincoln Day.
To commemorate his upcoming 200th birthday in February 2009, Congress established the
Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission  (ALBC) in 2000. Dedicated to renewing American appreciation of Lincoln’s legacy, the 15-member commission is made up of lawmakers and scholars and also features an advisory board of over 130 various Lincoln historians and enthusiasts. Located at
Library of Congress  in
Washington, D.C. , the
ALBC  is the organizing force behind numerous tributes, programs and cultural events highlighting a two-year celebration scheduled to begin in February 2008 at Lincoln’s birthplace:
Hodgenville ,
Kentucky .
Lincoln's birthplace and family home are national historic memorials: the
Abraham Lincoln Birthplace National Historic Site  in Hodgenville, and the Lincoln Home National Historic Site in Springfield, Illinois. The
Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum  opened in Springfield in 2005; it is a major tourist attraction, with state-of-the-art exhibits. The
Abraham Lincoln National Cemetery  is located in
Elwood, Illinois .
Portrait of Abraham Lincoln
Lincoln's portrait on the
American five dollar bill
The
Lincoln Memorial  in
Washington, D.C.
Lincoln's likeness on
Mount Rushmore
Lincoln stamp, issued November 19, 1965
The
Lincoln Tomb  in Springfield
Electoral history
Illinois' 7th congressional district , 1846  67
Abraham Lincoln  (Whig) - 6,340 (55.53%)
Peter Cartwright  (D) - 4,829 (42.29%)
Elihu Walcott  (Liberty) - 249 (2.18%)
1856 Republican National Convention  (Vice Presidential tally) : 68
William Lewis Dayton  - 523 (64.73%)
Abraham Lincoln  - 110 (13.61%)
Nathaniel Prentice Banks  - 46 (5.69%)
David Wilmot  - 43 (5.32%)
Charles Sumner  - 35 (4.33%)
Jacob Collamer  - 15 (1.86%)
John Alsop King  - 9 (1.11%)
Samuel Clarke Pomeroy  - 8 (0.99%)
Thomas Ford  - 7 (0.87%)
Henry Charley Gray  - 3 (0.37%)
Cassius M. Clay  - 3 (0.37%)
Joshua R. Giddings  - 2 (0.25%)
Whitfield Johnson  - 2 (0.25%)
Aaron Pennington  - 1 (0.12%)
Henry Wilson  - 1 (0.12%)
Illinois
United States Senate  election, 1858 : 69
Stephen A. Douglas  (D) (inc.) - 54 (54.00%)
Abraham Lincoln  (R) - 46 (46.00%)
1860 Republican National Convention   (Final Results on 3rd Ballot): 70
Abraham Lincoln  - 340 (73.0%)
William H. Seward  - 121.5 (26.1%)
Salmon P. Chase  - 2 (0.0%)
others - 2.5 (0.0%)
United States presidential election, 1860
Abraham Lincoln /
Hannibal Hamlin  (R) - 1,865,908 (39.8%) and 180 electoral votes (18 states carried)
John C. Breckinridge /
Joseph Lane  (Southern Democrats) - 848,019 (18.1%) and 72 electoral votes (11 states carried)
John Bell /
Edward Everett  (Constitution) - 590,901 (12.6%) and 39 electoral votes (3 states carried)
Stephen A. Douglas /
Herschel Vespasian Johnson  (Northern Democrats) - 1,380,202 (29.5%) and 12 electoral votes (1 state carried)
United States presidential election, 1864
Abraham Lincoln /
Andrew Johnson  (National Union) - 2,218,388 (55.0%) and 212 electoral votes (22 states carried)
George B. McClellan /
George H. Pendleton  (D) - 1,812,807 (45.0%) and 21 electoral votes (3 states carried)
See also
Military of the United States&#32;portal
American School , Lincoln's economic views.
Lincoln Boyhood National Memorial
Lincoln Memorial University
List of assassinated American politicians
List of United States Presidents who died in office
References
"
General Robert E. Lee surrendered the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia on April 9, 1865 ".
Goodwin 2005 , p.&nbsp;91
Holzer 2004 , p.&nbsp;232
Tracy Bouvé, Thomas&#32;(1893). History of the Town of Hingham, Massachusetts.&#32;
Harvard University . &nbsp;
Donald 1995 , pp.&nbsp;28, 152
"
Lincoln Trail Homestead State Park ".&#32;  Abraham Lincoln Online.&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
Fehrenbacher, Don&#32;(1989).
Speeches and Writings 1859-1865 .&#32;Library of America,&#32;p.163. &nbsp;
"
Abraham Lincoln, The Physical Man ".&#32;  Lincoln Portrait.&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
Sandburg 1974 , p.&nbsp;10
Thomas 1952 , pp.&nbsp;32–34
Basler 1946 , p.&nbsp;551
Frank, John&#32;(1991). Lincoln as a Lawyer.&#32;Americana House. ISBN 0962529028. &nbsp;
"
Protest in Illinois Legislature on Slavery ".&#32;
University of Michigan Library &#32;(
1937-03-03 ).&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
"
A Century of Lawmaking for a New Nation: U.S. Congressional Documents and Debates, 1774 - 1875 ".&#32;
Library of Congress .&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
Donald 1995 , &amp;sect;6
Donald 1995 , &amp;sect;7
Donald 1995 , pp.&nbsp;150–51
"
Lincoln at Peoria ".&#32;  Abraham Lincoln at Peoria.&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
"
Speech at Peoria, October 16, ".&#32;  Abraham Lincoln and Freedom.&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
Lincoln, Abraham&#32;(June 1858).&#32;"
A House Divided Against Itself Cannot Stand ".&#32;
National Center for Public Policy Research .&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
Basler 1955 , p.&nbsp;255
Thomas 1952 , p.&nbsp;216 See also:   Luthin, Reinhard H.&#32;(December 1987). The First Lincoln Campaign.&#32;Peter Smith Publishing. ISBN 0844612928. &nbsp; and   Nevins, Allan&#32;(
1992-09-30 ). Ordeal of the Union Vol. 4.&#32;
Charles Scribner's Sons . ISBN 0020354452. &nbsp;
Boritt, Gabor S.&#32;(
1997-05-29 ). Why the Civil War Came.&#32;
Oxford University Press ,&#32;3–30. ISBN 0195113764. &nbsp;
James M. McPherson&#32;(1988).
Battle cry of freedom: the Civil War era .&#32;US:&#32;Oxford University Press,&#32;904 pages. ISBN 019516895X. &nbsp;
Fehrenbacher, Don E.&#32;(1989).
Speeches and Writings by Abraham Lincoln, 1859-1865 .&#32;Library of America. ISBN 0940450631.&nbsp;"either the Missouri line extended, or Douglas' and Eli Thayer's Pop. Sov. would lose us everything we gained in the election; that filibustering for all South of us, and making slave states of it, would follow in spite of us, under either plan." &nbsp; - from private letter to Thurlow Weed, 1860-12-17
WTS Memoirs 185-86 (Lib. of America ed., 1990).
Nevins, Allan&#32;(
1971-09-01 ). The War for the Union Volume I.....The Improvised War 1861-1862.&#32;Konecky &amp; Konecky,&#32;29. ISBN 1568522967. &nbsp;
"
Letter to Albert G. Hodges ".&#32;  Abraham Lincoln Online&#32;(
1864-04-04 ).&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
"
Letter to Horace Greeley ".&#32;  Abraham Lincoln Online.&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
Douglass, Frederick&#32;(April 2001). The Life and Times of Frederick Douglass.&#32;Digital Scanning. ISBN 1582183678. &nbsp;
Pulling, Anne Frances&#32;(
2001-06-11 ). Altoona.&#32;
Arcadia Publishing ,&#32;10. ISBN 0738505161. &nbsp;
Grimsley, Mark&#32;(
2001-03-01 ). The Collapse of the Confederacy.&#32;
University of Nebraska Press ,&#32;80. ISBN 0803221703. &nbsp;
Basler 1955 , p.&nbsp;514
Curtin, Andrew G.&#32;(
1863-09-03 ).&#32;"
Andrew G. Curtin to Abraham Lincoln, Friday, September 4, 1863 (Politics in Pennsylvania) ".&#32;
Library of Congress .&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
"
Gettysburg Address ".&#32; Columbia Encyclopedia, 6th Edition .&#32;  Columbia University Press via
Bartleby.com &#32;(May 2001).&#32;Retrieved on
2008-08-31 .&nbsp;"It is one of the most famous and most quoted of modern speeches."
Davidson, James West&#32;(April 1990). The United States: A History of the Republic.&#32;
Prentice Hall ,&#32;446. ISBN 0139436979. &nbsp;
"
Proclamation of Amnesty ".&#32;
Bartleby.com &#32;(1863).&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
Basler 1955 , p.&nbsp;333
"
Joseph Hooker ".&#32;  Civil War Home.&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
"
The Lincoln Log, April 9, 1865. ".
Jaffa 2000 , p.&nbsp;399
Donald 1995 , &amp;sect;20
Donald 1995 , pp.&nbsp;576, 580;"
President Lincoln Enters Richmond, 1865 ".&#32;  Eyewitness to History.&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
McPherson 1992 , pp.&nbsp;61–64
Jaffa 2000 , p.&nbsp;263
Diggins, John P.&#32;(
1986-08-15 ). The Lost Soul of American Politics: Virtue, Self-Interest, and the Foundations of Liberalism.&#32;
University of Chicago Press ,&#32;307. ISBN 0226148777. &nbsp;
Foner 1970 , p.&nbsp;215
&#32;"Gordon AM. Abraham Lincoln"&#32;&#32;(March 1962).  Kentucky Medical Association &#32;(60): 249–53. PMID 13900423. &nbsp;
Vidal, Gore&#32;(February 1991).&#32;"Communications".
American Historical Review  : 324–326. &nbsp; See also:   Fehrenbacher, Don E.&#32;(February 1991).&#32;"Communications".
American Historical Review  : 326–328. &nbsp; and   Sotos, JG&#32;(2008).
The Physical Lincoln Sourcebook .&#32;
Mount Vernon ,
VA :&#32;Mt. Vernon Book Systems,&#32;318–326. &nbsp;
"
Maladies and Conditions ".&#32;  Doctor Zebra.&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
Wills 1993 , p.&nbsp;39
Townsend, George Alfred&#32;(1865). The Life, Crime and Capture of John Wilkes Booth.&#32;
New York :&#32;
Dick and Fitzgerald . &nbsp;
Harrison, Lowell Hayes&#32;(2000). Lincoln of Kentucky.&#32;
University Press of Kentucky ,&#32;3–4. ISBN 0813121566. &nbsp;
Sotos, JG&#32;(2008).
The Physical Lincoln: Finding the Genetic Cause of Abraham Lincoln's Height, Homeliness, Pseudo-Depression, and Imminent Cancer Death .&#32;
Mount Vernon ,
VA :&#32;Mt. Vernon Book Systems. &nbsp;
Marion, Robert&#32;(February 1994). Was George Washington Really the Father of Our Country?: A Clinical Geneticist Looks at World History.&#32;Perseus Books,&#32;88–124. ISBN 0201622556. &nbsp; See also:   Ready, Tinker&#32;(1999).&#32;"Access to presidential DNA denied".
Nature Medicine  &#32; 5 &#32;(859). &nbsp;
Donald 1995 , p.&nbsp;15
Miller 2002 , pp.&nbsp;57–59
Guelzo 1999 , p.&nbsp;20
Guelzo 1999 , pp.&nbsp;18–19
Guelzo 1999 , p.&nbsp;194
Wilson 1999 , p.&nbsp;254
Wilson 1999 , pp.&nbsp;251–254
Donald 1995 , p.&nbsp;514
"
US Vice President - R Convention ".&#32;  Our Campaigns.&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
"
IL US Senate ".&#32;  Our Campaigns.&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
"
US President - R Convention ".&#32;  Our Campaigns.&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
Jaffa 2000 , p.&nbsp;258
Guelzo 1999 , pp.&nbsp;194–195
Miller 2002 , p.&nbsp;297
"
IL District 7 ".&#32;  Our Campaigns.&#32;Retrieved on
2008-05-21 .
Books referenced
Basler, Roy P.&#32;(1946),&#32; Abraham Lincoln: His Speeches and Writings  &nbsp;.
Basler, Roy P.&#32;(1955),&#32; Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln ,
New Brunswick, NJ :
Rutgers University Press  &nbsp;
Foner, Eric&#32;(1970),&#32; Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men: The Ideology of the Republican Party before the Civil War  &nbsp;
Jaffa, Harry V.&#32;(2000),&#32; A New birth of Freedom: Abraham Lincoln and the Coming of the Civil War , ISBN 0-8476-9952-8 &nbsp;.
Goodwin, Doris Kearns &#32;(2005),&#32; Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln , ISBN 0-684-82490-6 &nbsp;.
Guelzo, Allen C.&#32;(1999),&#32;
Abraham Lincoln: Redeemer President  , ISBN 0-8028-3872-3,  &nbsp;
Holzer, Harold&#32;(2004),&#32; Lincoln at Cooper Union: The Speech That Made Abraham Lincoln President  &nbsp;.
McPherson, James M.&#32;(1992),&#32; Abraham Lincoln and the Second American Revolution  &nbsp;.
Miller, William Lee&#32;(2002),&#32; Lincoln's Virtues: An Ethical Biography , ISBN 0-375-40158-X &nbsp;
Sandburg, Carl &#32;(1974),&#32; Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years and The War Years , Harvest Books, ISBN 0156026112 &nbsp;.
Thomas, Benjamin P.&#32;(1952),&#32;
Abraham Lincoln: A Biography  ,  &nbsp;.
Wills, Garry &#32;(1993),&#32;, ISBN 0-671-86742-3 &nbsp;.
Wilson, Douglas L.&#32;(1999),&#32; Honor's Voice: The Transformation of Abraham Lincoln  &nbsp;.
Further reading
Biographies
Isaac N. Arnold ,  The Life of Abraham Lincoln  (1885), written by Lincoln's friend and political ally
William H Herndon ,
Lincoln
Beveridge, Albert J .  Abraham Lincoln: 1809-1858  (1928). 2 vol. to 1858; notable for strong, unbiased political coverage
online edition
Richard Carwardine.  Lincoln: A Life of Purpose and Power  ISBN 1400044561 (2003), winner of the 2004 Lincoln Prize from Gettysburg College
William E. Gienapp.  Abraham Lincoln and Civil War America: A Biography  by ISBN 0-19-515099-6 (2002), short
online edition
John Hay  &amp;
John George Nicolay .  Abraham Lincoln: a History  (1890);
Vol 1  and
Vol 2  10 vols in all; detailed narrative of era by Lincoln's aides
Reinhard H Luthin   The Real Abraham Lincoln  (1960), emphasis on politics
Mark E. Neely.  The Abraham Lincoln Encyclopedia  (1984), detailed articles on many men and movements associated with AL
Mark E. Neely.  The Last Best Hope of Earth: Abraham Lincoln and the Promise of America  (1993), Pulitzer prize winning author
Stephen B. Oates.  With Malice Toward None: The Life of Abraham Lincoln  (1994)
James G. Randall.  Lincoln the President  (4 vol., 1945–55; reprint 2000.) by prize winning scholar.
Mr. Lincoln   excerpts ed. by Richard N. Current (1957)
Ingri and Edgar Parin d'Aulaire ,
Abraham Lincoln   (1939), for children
John C. Waugh.  One Man Great Enough: Abraham Lincoln’s Road to Civil War  ISBN 978-0-15-101071-4 (2007), Harcourt
John C. Waugh.  Reelecting Lincoln: The Battle for the 1864 Presidency  ISBN 0-517-59766-7 (1997), Crown Publishers
Specialty topics
Angle, Paul M.,  Here I Have Lived: A History of Lincoln's Springfield, 1821-1865,  (1935)
online edition
Baker, Jean H.  Mary Todd Lincoln: A Biography  (1987)
online edition
Belz, Herman.  Abraham Lincoln, Constitutionalism, and Equal Rights in the Civil War Era  (1998)
Boritt, Gabor S.  Lincoln and the Economics of the American Dream  (1994). Lincoln's economic theory and policies
Boritt, Gabor S. ed.  Lincoln the War President  (1994)
Boritt, Gabor S., ed.  The Historian's Lincoln  U. of Illinois Press, 1988, historiography
Bruce, Robert V.  Lincoln and the Tools of War  (1956) on weapons development during the war
online edition
Bush, Bryan S.  Lincoln and the Speeds: The Untold Story of a Devoted and Enduring Friendship  (2008) ISBN 978-0-9798802-6-1
Chittenden, Lucius E. ,
Recollections of President Lincoln and His Administration''  , (1891). –
Google Books
Donald, David Herbert.  Lincoln Reconsidered: Essays on the Civil War Era  (1960)
Donald, David Herbert.  We Are Lincoln Men: Abraham Lincoln and His Friends  Simon &amp; Schuster, (2003).
Guelzo, Allen C.,  Lincoln and Douglas: The Debates that Defined America , Simon &amp; Schuster (2008). ISBN-13: 978-0743273206
Harris, William C.  With Charity for All: Lincoln and the Restoration of the Union  (1997). AL's plans for Reconstruction
Hendrick, Burton J.  Lincoln's War Cabinet  (1946)
online edition
Hofstadter, Richard.  The American Political Tradition: And the Men Who Made It  (1948) ch 5: "Abraham Lincoln and the Self-Made Myth"
Lea, James Henry&#32;(1909).
The Ancestry of Abraham Lincoln .&#32;Houghton Mifflin. &nbsp;
Marshall, John A., " American Bastille" (1870) Fifth edition: A History of the Illegal Arrests and Imprisonment of American Citizens in the Northern and Border States on Account of Their political opinions during the late Civil War. Part 1
McPherson, James M.  Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era  (1988). Pulitzer Prize winner surveys all aspects of the war
Morgenthau, Hans J., and David Hein.  Essays on Lincoln's Faith and Politics . White Burkett Miller Center of Public Affairs at the U of Virginia, 1983.
Neely, Mark E.  The Fate of Liberty: Abraham Lincoln and Civil Liberties  (1992). Pulitzer Prize winner.
online version
Ostendorf, Lloyd, and Hamilton, Charles,  Lincoln in Photographs: An Album of Every Known Pose , Morningside House Inc., 1963, ISBN 089029-087-3.
Paludan, Philip S.  The Presidency of Abraham Lincoln  (1994), thorough treatment of Lincoln's administration
Peterson, Merrill D.  Lincoln in American Memory  (1994). how Lincoln was remembered after 1865
Polsky, Andrew J. "'Mr. Lincoln's Army' Revisited: Partisanship, Institutional Position, and Union Army Command, 1861–1865."  Studies in American Political Development  (2002), 16: 176-207
Randall, James G.  Lincoln the Liberal Statesman  (1947)
Richardson, Heather Cox.  The Greatest Nation of the Earth: Republican Economic Policies during the Civil War  (1997)
Shenk, Joshua Wolf.  Lincoln's Melancholy: How Depression Challenged a President and Fueled His Greatness  (2005)
Kenneth P. Williams.  Lincoln Finds a General: A Military Study of the Civil War  (1959) 5 volumes on Lincoln's control of the war
Williams, T. Harry.  Lincoln and His Generals  (1967).
Wilson, Douglas L.  Lincoln's Sword: The Presidency and the Power of Words (2006) ISBN 1-4000-4039-6.
Lincoln in art and popular culture
DiLorenzo, Thomas &#32;(2002).
The Real Lincoln . ISBN 0-7615-2646-3. &nbsp;
Lauriston, Bullard. F.&#32;(1952). Lincoln in Marble and Bronze.&#32;New Brunswick, New Jersey:&#32;Rutgers University Press. &nbsp;
Mead, Franklin B.&#32;(1932). Heroic Statues in Bronze of Abraham Lincoln: Introducing The Hoosier Youth by
Paul Manship .&#32;The Lincoln National Life Foundation. &nbsp;
Moffatt, Frederick C.&#32;(1998). Errant Bronzes:
George Grey Barnard 's Statues of Abraham Lincoln.&#32;Newark, DE:&#32;University of Delaware Press. &nbsp;
Murry, Freeman Henry Morris&#32;[1916]&#32;(1972). Emancipation and the Freed in American Sculpture.&#32;Books For Libraries Press. &nbsp;
Petz, Weldon&#32;(1987). Michigan's Monumental Tributes to Abraham Lincoln.&#32;Historical Society of Michigan. &nbsp;
Redway, Maurine Whorton;&#32;Bracken, Dorothy Kendall&#32;(1957). Marks of Lincoln on Our Land.&#32;New York:&#32;Hastings House, Publishers. &nbsp;
Savage, Kirk&#32;(1997). Standing Soldiers, Kneeling Slaves: Race War and Monument in Nineteenth Century America.&#32;Princeton University Press. &nbsp;
Tice, George&#32;(1984). Lincoln.&#32;New Brunswick, New Jersey:&#32;Rutgers University Press. &nbsp;
Primary sources
Lincoln, Abraham&#32;(2000).&#32;in ed by Philip Van Doren Stern: The Life and Writings of Abraham Lincoln.&#32;Modern Library Classics. &nbsp;
Fehrenbacher, Don E., ed.  Abraham Lincoln: Speeches and Writings 1832-1858  (
Library of America , ed. 1989) ISBN 978-0-94045043-1
Fehrenbacher, Don E., ed.  Abraham Lincoln: Speeches and Writings 1859-1865  (
Library of America , ed. 1989) ISBN 978-0-94045063-9
External links
Abraham Lincoln  at the
Open Directory Project
Abraham Lincoln  at the
Open Directory Project  – Speeches and writings
The Life of Lincoln by Henry Ketcham  &mdash; Free full-length recording
Lincoln Studies Center at Knox College
Photographs of Abraham Lincoln
Abraham Lincoln  at the
Biographical Directory of the United States Congress ''
The Lincoln Institute
Mr. Lincoln's Virtual Library
Poetry written by Abraham Lincoln
Lincoln quotes collected by Roger Norton
The Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum  Springfield, Illinois
The Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln
President Lincoln’s Cottage
US PATNo. 6,469
&nbsp;  —  Manner of Buoying Vessels  — A. Lincoln — 1849
Lincoln's Patent
National Park Service Abraham Lincoln birthplace  (includes good early history)
Research Center  provides finding aid to article subject from the Special Collections, Washington State Historical Society (WSHS)
The Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission
Lincoln Memorial  Washington, DC
Digitized books about Abraham Lincoln from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Library
Lincoln/Net: Abraham Lincoln Historical Digitization Project, Northern Illinois University Libraries
Lincoln Home National Historic Site:A Place of Growth and Memory,  lesson plan
Lincoln Boyhood National Memorial: Forging Greatness during Lincoln's Youth,  lesson plan
Abraham Lincoln: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
Essay on Abraham Lincoln and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
Project Gutenberg eTexts
List of
Works by Abraham Lincoln  at
Project Gutenberg
Richardson, James D. (compiler).
A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the Presidents and more: Volume 6, part 1: Abraham Lincoln . &nbsp; includes major (and minor) state papers, but not speeches or letters
Lincoln's Yarns and Stories . &nbsp;
Hay, John ;&#32;
John George Nicolay &#32;(1890). Abraham Lincoln: a History. &nbsp; "
Volume 1 ". to 1856; coverage of national politics.  "
Volume 2 ". (1832 to 1901) ; covers 1856 to early 1861; coverage of national politics; part of 10 volume "life and times" by Lincoln's aides
Nicolay, Helen&#32;(1907).
The Boys' Life of Abraham Lincoln . &nbsp; (1866 to 1954)
Ketcham, Henry&#32;(1901).
The Life of Abraham Lincoln . &nbsp; ; popular
Morse, John T.&#32;(1899). Abraham Lincoln. &nbsp; ; a solid scholarly biography "
Volume 1 "."
Volume 2 ".
Francis Fisher Browne&#32;(1913).
The Every-day Life of Abraham Lincoln . &nbsp; ; popular
George Haven Putnam, Litt. D.&#32;(1909).
Abraham Lincoln: The People's Leader in the Struggle for National Existence . &nbsp;
Stephenson, Nathaniel W.&#32;(1922).
Lincoln's Personal Life . &nbsp; ; popular
Benson (Lorn Charnwood), Godfrey Rathbone&#32;(1917).
Abraham Lincoln . &nbsp;
United States House of Representatives
Preceded&nbsp;by
John Henry
Member from
Illinois's7th congressional district  March 4, 1847 – March 3, 1849
Succeeded&nbsp;by
Thomas L. Harris
Political offices
Preceded&nbsp;by
James Buchanan
President of the United States  March 4, 1861 – April 15, 1865
Succeeded&nbsp;by
Andrew Johnson
Party political offices
Preceded&nbsp;by
John C. Frémont
Republican Party presidential candidate
1860 ,
1864
Succeeded&nbsp;by
Ulysses S. Grant
Honorary titles
Preceded&nbsp;by
Henry Clay
Persons who have
lain in state or honor in the
United States Capitol rotunda  April 19, 1865 – April 21, 1865
Succeeded&nbsp;by
Thaddeus Stevens
President
Abraham Lincoln
Events
1860 election &nbsp;·
American Civil War &nbsp;·
Emancipation Proclamation &nbsp;·
Gettysburg Address &nbsp;·
Assassination &nbsp;·
Burial and exhumation
Abraham Lincoln
Family
Mary Todd Lincoln &nbsp;·
Edward Lincoln &nbsp;·
Robert Todd Lincoln &nbsp;·
Willie Lincoln &nbsp;·
Tad Lincoln
Legacy
Cultural depictions &nbsp;·
Lincoln Memorial
Life and views
Early life &nbsp;·
Religion &nbsp;·
Sexuality &nbsp;·
Slavery
Presidents of the United States
George Washington &nbsp;·
John Adams &nbsp;·
Thomas Jefferson &nbsp;·
James Madison &nbsp;·
James Monroe &nbsp;·
John Quincy Adams &nbsp;·
Andrew Jackson &nbsp;·
Martin Van Buren &nbsp;·
William Henry Harrison &nbsp;·
John Tyler &nbsp;·
James K. Polk &nbsp;·
Zachary Taylor &nbsp;·
Millard Fillmore &nbsp;·
Franklin Pierce &nbsp;·
James Buchanan &nbsp;·
Abraham Lincoln &nbsp;·
Andrew Johnson &nbsp;·
Ulysses S. Grant &nbsp;·
Rutherford B. Hayes &nbsp;·
James A. Garfield &nbsp;·
Chester A. Arthur &nbsp;·
Grover Cleveland &nbsp;·
Benjamin Harrison &nbsp;·
Grover Cleveland &nbsp;·
William McKinley &nbsp;·
Theodore Roosevelt &nbsp;·
William Howard Taft &nbsp;·
Woodrow Wilson &nbsp;·
Warren G. Harding &nbsp;·
Calvin Coolidge &nbsp;·
Herbert Hoover &nbsp;·
Franklin D. Roosevelt &nbsp;·
Harry S. Truman &nbsp;·
Dwight D. Eisenhower &nbsp;·
John F. Kennedy &nbsp;·
Lyndon B. Johnson &nbsp;·
Richard Nixon &nbsp;·
Gerald Ford &nbsp;·
Jimmy Carter &nbsp;·
Ronald Reagan &nbsp;·
George H. W. Bush &nbsp;·
Bill Clinton &nbsp;·
George W. Bush
Seal of the President of the United States
United States Republican Party presidential nominees
John C. Frémont &nbsp;·
Abraham Lincoln &nbsp;·
Ulysses S. Grant &nbsp;·
Rutherford B. Hayes &nbsp;·
James A. Garfield &nbsp;·
James G. Blaine &nbsp;·
Benjamin Harrison &nbsp;·
William McKinley &nbsp;·
Theodore Roosevelt &nbsp;·
William Howard Taft &nbsp;·
Charles Evans Hughes &nbsp;·
Warren G. Harding &nbsp;·
Calvin Coolidge &nbsp;·
Herbert Hoover &nbsp;·
Alf Landon &nbsp;·
Wendell Willkie &nbsp;·
Thomas E. Dewey &nbsp;·
Dwight D. Eisenhower &nbsp;·
Richard Nixon &nbsp;·
Barry Goldwater &nbsp;·
Richard Nixon &nbsp;·
Gerald Ford &nbsp;·
Ronald Reagan &nbsp;·
George H. W. Bush &nbsp;·
Bob Dole &nbsp;·
George W. Bush &nbsp;·
John McCain
Cabinet  of
President
Abraham Lincoln (1861-1865)
Vice President
Hannibal Hamlin  (1861-1865) •
Andrew Johnson (1865)
Abraham Lincoln, sixteenth President of the United States
Secretary of State
William H. Seward (1861-1865)
Secretary of the Treasury
Salmon P. Chase  (1861-1864) •
William P. Fessenden  (1864-1865) •
Hugh McCulloch (1865)
Secretary of War
Simon Cameron  (1861-1862) •
Edwin M. Stanton (1862-1865)
Attorney General
Edward Bates  (1861-1864) •
James Speed (1864-1865)
Postmaster General
Montgomery Blair  (1861-1864) •
William Dennison (1864-1865)
Secretary of the Navy
Gideon Welles (1861-1865)
Secretary of the Interior
Caleb Blood Smith  (1861-1862) •
John Palmer Usher  (1863-1865)
Black Hawk War (1832)
Factions
British Band  •
Fox  •
Ho-Chunk  •
Illinois Militia  •
Kickapoo  •
Sioux  •
Menominee  •
Michigan Territorial Militia  •
Potawatomi  •
Sauk  •
United States Army
People
John Giles Adams  •
Milton Alexander  •
Henry Apple  •
Elizabeth Armstrong  •
Henry Atkinson  •
David Bailey  •
Black Hawk  •
Hugh Brady  •
Ebenezer Brigham  •
Jesse B. Brown  •
George Davenport  •
Jefferson Davis  •
John Dement  •
Henry Dodge  •
Mike Girty  •
Henry Gratiot  •
Rachel Hall  •
Sylvia Hall  •
William S. Hamilton  •
James D. Henry  •
George W. Jones  •
Keewassee  •
Keokuk  •
Abraham Lincoln  •
Meommuse  •
Neapope  •
Adam Payne  •
Elijah Phillips  •
Alexander Posey  •
James Sample  •
Lucy Sample  •
Winfield Scott  •
Shabbona  •
Adam Wilson Snyder  •
James W. Stephenson  •
Isaiah Stillman  •
Clack Stone  •
Joseph M. Street  •
James M. Strode  •
Felix St. Vrain  •
Joseph Throckmorton  •
Zachary Taylor  •
Wabokieshiek  •
Waubonsee  •
Weesheet  •
Samuel Whiteside •
Places
Illinois  :
Apple River Fort  •
Buffalo Grove  •
Dixon's Ferry  •
Fort Armstrong  •
Fort Beggs  •
Galena  •
Indian Creek  •
Kellogg's Grove  •
Plum River  •
Saukenuk  •
Stillman Creek  •
Stillman's Run Battle Site  •
Waddams Grove  •
Yellow Creek
Michigan Territory   (
Wisconsin  ):
Bad Axe River  •
Fort Blue Mounds  •
Fort Crawford  •
Fort Defiance  •
Fort Hamilton  •
Fort Jackson  •
Fort Koshkonong  •
Fort Union  •
Gratiot's Grove  •
Hamilton's Diggings  •
Pecatonica River  •
Sinsinawa Mound  •
Wisconsin Heights Battlefield  •
Wisconsin River •
Engagements
Minor engagements  •
Battle of Stillman's Run  •
Buffalo Grove ambush  •
Plum River raid  •
Indian Creek massacre  •
St. Vrain massacre  •
Attacks at Fort Blue Mounds  •
Spafford Farm massacre  •
Battle of Horseshoe Bend  •
Battle of Waddams Grove  •
Battle of Kellogg's Grove  •
Attack at Ament's Cabin  •
Battle of Apple River Fort  •
Sinsinawa Mound raid  •
Battle of Wisconsin Heights  •
Battle of Bad Axe
Other topics
Black Hawk Purchase  •
Black Hawk Tree  •
Keokuk's Reserve  •
Neutral Ground  •
Warrior ''
NAME
Lincoln, Abraham
ALTERNATIVE NAMES
SHORT DESCRIPTION
16th President of the United States of America
DATE OF BIRTH
February 12, 1809
PLACE OF BIRTH
Hardin County, Kentucky
DATE OF DEATH
April 15, 1865
PLACE OF DEATH
Washington, D.C.